good afternoon thanks for joining us
when captain sir tom moore decided to
launch a national campaign
in his own back garden raising more
money and achieving more in his
100th year than perhaps any centenarian
in our history
he knew instinctively which organization
he wanted to thank
and support it was and is
the nhs and he was right because
there are many people and groups
responsible for the uk's
vaccination program and we owe our
thanks to our brilliant scientists
to kate bingham and the vaccine task
force which has
procured over 400 million doses seven
different types of
vaccine manufacturers the delivery
drivers the pharmacists
the military medics countless volunteers
but to get this life-saving medicine
into the arms of the nation at
the kind of speed that we're seeing
we're relying on the doctors and the
nurses and all the staff
of our nhs and it's thanks to
their effort the most colossal in the
history of our national health service
that we have today passed the milestone
of 10
million vaccinations in the united
kingdom
including almost 90 percent of those
aged 75 and over
in england and every eligible person in
a care home
and with every jab and every day we have
more evidence about the effectiveness
of these vaccines new research from
oxford university suggests the
protection provided
by the first dose of the oxford
astrazeneca vaccine
kicks in after three weeks and lasts
right the way through
to the booster at three months and
research
also shows that the oxford astrozenica
vaccine
seems likely to reduce transmission
to others and even if these vaccines
cannot make us
invulnerable and no vaccine has ever
given 100
protection to everybody the evidence
increasingly shows that our vaccines
achieve this
crucial objective to reduce death
and serious illness from those major
strains of covid
that have been subject to research and
in the days leading up to our review
point in the week of
the 15th of february we will be
accumulating
even more data helped by nhs
test and trace so that we can begin to
chart
a way ahead starting if the date allows
with the reopening of schools on march
the eighth
and i'll be sitting out as much as we
can about that
road map forward on february the 22nd
and though today there are some signs of
hope
the numbers of covered patients in
hospital are beginning to fall for the
first time since the onset of this
new wave the level of infection
is still alarmingly high and i'm sorry
to say
that we've lost another 1 322 lives
in the last 24 hours alone and our
hearts
again go out to every family that
grieves
and the wards of our nhs are under huge
pressure
with more than 32 000 covered patients
still
in hospital and so tonight
let's clap together for captain tom
at 6 p.m and let's clap for the spirit
of optimism
that he stood for but let's also clap
for all those he campaigned for our
brilliant
nhs staff and care workers and let's
do everything we can to carry on
supporting them
because if we stay at home protect our
nhs
and save lives then in the words of
captain tom
tomorrow will be a good day
i'm now going to ask chris to go through
the slides thanks prime minister
so the first slide shows the number of
people coming forward and testing
positive for covid
uh in the uk and as you can see
the numbers are now going down steadily
and these this is backed up by other
studies looking at this in a different
way so there is now
a continual steady decline thanks to
the work of everyone across the entire
country
in avoiding unnecessary contact and
staying at home
except whether necessary things for them
to do next slide please
as a result of that the number of people
in hospital with kovid
has now gone down from its peak
quite noticeably but as the prime
minister said there are
still a very large number of people in
hospital and more people
than there were in the first peak in
april last year
so this is still a very major problem
but it is one that is heading
the right way next slide please
uh and uh it is good to see that as a
result of that
and this is always a bit later uh uh in
time
lagged in time the number of uh deaths
in people
who have coveted is beginning to come
down
but as the prime minister said the
numbers are still extremely high
and they will stay high for uh quite
some time but coming down
on as you can see on this pathway and
the first effects we will
see of that on vaccination are likely to
be
on these uh death numbers next slide
please
the good news about vaccination is as
the prime minister says this is steadily
increasing in all four nations of the
united kingdom and particularly here in
england
uh we have very clear data showing it
going up day on day and the numbers are
now
very substantial next slide please
so the final slide and i wanted to take
a little bit of time on this slide
shows two things it shows in the very
dark
blue bars in the center uh the
people who have sadly died from covid
and
in the wider bars these are everybody
who's come into hospital and this is
from a hospital study
done here in the nhs system
and what you can see with this is that
if you look at the red line the top red
line
this is every age group from zero to
four right at the bottom
to 90 and over including uh colonel
sirtons or captain saton's
age at the top and if you look at the
first red line that is the group of
people down to the age of 70
including people in care homes who are
liable
to uh go into hospital because they're
older if they catch covid
and although the majority still will
come out of hospital will survive
a significant number of those will die
and if you take it down to 70 if you
imagine that the hot the
vaccine was completely effective which
as the prime minister says you wouldn't
expect for any vaccine but
completely effective that is 83 of all
the people who have died of kovid
in this wave are over that age group so
they're over the age
which we will get to when we vaccinated
everyone over 70.
but if you look at the situation for
people who've gone into hospital
only 54 percent of all the people
who go into hospital are over that age
so what this means is
once we vaccinated down to uh the situ
to 70 and above plus those who care for
them frontline nhs
and frontline care workers we should
significantly reduce
the number of deaths but we will reduce
by a much smaller number
the number of people going into hospital
because a very large number of people go
into hospital
who will come out of hospital they will
they will recover but they have to be in
the nhs and have
care for example oxygen and
dexamethasone steroid
drugs so if we then vaccinate all the
way down to
what's called the jcvi the joint
committee on vaccination immunization
first wave this is down to people over
and those who have actually got a
pre-existing health conditions
you then get through virtually all the
people who
have a high chance of dying so this is
around 98
of those who die are in that group and
importantly around 80 percent just over
of all of those who go into hospitals so
the first wave
which is uh the aim is to complete on
the 15th
of february we would expect a situation
where we can stop
a very high proportion of the deaths but
a rather smaller proportion of the
pressure on the nhs
those very large numbers in hospital as
you go on to the next wave down to those
of the 50
we have further inroads into reducing
death
and also significantly reduce the
pressure on the nhs
the final point i'd like to make and
it's a cheering one
is if you look down at the bottom of
this the number of
children under the age of 18
who go into hospital is relatively
speaking very small compared to adults
thank you very much thanks very much
chris let's go to the public
spencer and hammersmith
for those people who have received
vaccines are you keeping track of the
number who subsequently test positive
for covid
are being admitted to hospital and of
those how many
are dying in particular for those who
have been vaccinated but still catch
covered
are you able to tell from the data
whether the severity of the illness
is reduced thank you very important
questions from
us from spencer and really repeating the
the point that although the there's a
higher degree of efficacy
uh in in the vaccines that we're using
no vaccine is 100 effective uh
for everybody but chris probably but one
better for you
thank you mr really important question
and yes what we are doing
doing is linking up the data for those
who've been vaccinated
uh with hospital admissions data
emergency admissions data and also
uh mortality data people who died uh so
that we can actually see
whether there is an effect and how more
importantly how big the effect is
because we're sure there will be an
effect
of vaccination on reducing the number of
people who get severe disease and have
to go to hospital
and the impact on those who die so we're
making a big effort
to try and link those data together so
that we can give clear
answers to the question uh that's
implied in this which is we can then say
the vaccines have had this impact on
mortality
on reducing deaths and have had this
impact on reducing the number of people
who are getting severe disease
and going into hospital thanks very much
spencer paul in eastbourne first of all
congratulations to everyone that's been
involved in the vaccination program i
think it's something we can all be proud
of
my question is related to the second
dose and it's really that if i've had my
second dose
and i'm socializing exclusively with
other people that have had their second
dose
can we ditch social guidelines uh social
distancing guidelines and intermix
normally
bearing in mind that if we weren't
mixing exclusively with people that had
their second dose
i.e first doses and people that have not
had a vaccine at all
that we would of course still maintain
all the social distancing measures in
place
if i can't socialize exclusively when
i'm exclusively with people that have
had their second dose
what's the rationale thanks
paul in another very very good question
a lot of people are starting to ask this
question i think that we really need to
see more data
particularly about a transmission uh
from
between people who've already had the uh
the vaccine
and others before we we think about
relaxing social
uh distancing and guidelines for uh for
everybody and i think that
uh really this is something that we will
uh we will start to think a bit further
down the line
about what potential is opened up by
uh by these vaccinations but i think
what everybody wants to see is a world
in which
we can relax uh the guidelines and the
uh non-pharmaceutical interventions for
everybody so relax all the kind of
restrictions for everybody and and do
that by
vaccinating uh as as chris was
explaining with the
uh the chart of the most vulnerable
groups but vaccinating as many
of the most vulnerable as as we can as
fast as possible
and then taking a view about the
interaction between that and the
the prevalence of the of the disease at
the moment
as as we've discussed several times the
level of infection is still forbiddingly
high
for us to imagine uh the relaxation of
the
uh of the current guidelines but we're
obviously going to be reviewing that uh
in the days
ahead chris anything you want to say
more about this this idea that
people increasingly talk uh talk of a
vaccine uh passports as it were so thank
you
uh pm i mean and thank you for the
question because i'd really like to make
uh two
points really uh clearly at the
beginning and then expand on them a bit
the first is if you've just been
vaccinated there is a period of time
after that when you do not have any
protection so it's very important that
in that stage
you realize that it takes two or three
weeks in older people probably slightly
longer
to achieve any kind of protection second
thing is
we are our really clear advice at the
moment is
please stick to the social distancing
irrespective of whether you've had
vaccination of course because we are
delaying the second dose
the great majority of people are
actually vaccinated with one dose but
not with two at this stage but but that
will
change over time as the as we start to
do roll out the second vaccination
but then i think the thing to understand
with these and this is in answer to the
question what's the rationale
vaccines are going to protect in three
different ways
the first of which is they will protect
you the person who's being vaccinated
and they'll protect
to a very good degree uh based on the
data we have so far
of course we need to get more data in
real life that's what the last question
was about
but we are confident it will protect you
as an individual secondly as you say
it'll mean that we will that people will
be able to know that many of the people
they interact with
have also been vaccinated and that will
also reduce the risk
although we don't yet know uh with
confidence
quite how much these vaccines reduce the
risk of transmission
so they do reduce the risk of severe
disease of symptomatic disease and of
dying
they probably reduce the risk of
transmission and data came out today to
support that
but we're not absolutely confident about
exactly how much
and then the third way they produce
reduce the risk
is to reduce the amount of the virus
that is circulating in the whole
population
and that we are nowhere near uh being
close to and i think if you think of
those numbers right at the beginning
and think back to the last published ons
data that implied somewhere like one in
55 people
currently have the virus the rate of
virus in the community is incredibly
high
so that third thing we also need to do
which is use the vaccine
plus the social distancing that everyone
is doing to pull the rates of the
uh of the virus right down and then if
you've got very low
in the community you're vaccinated and
your friends and colleagues are
vaccinated
that will substantially reduce the risk
for everybody
thanks very much paul laura kunsberg bbc
uh
thank you prime minister and the vaccine
program is a huge source of pride to so
many people
but can you give a firm date for when
hotel quarantine will start
and will you offer more help for people
who just can't afford to isolate
as you well know not everybody is
entitled to the 500 pound payment that
is available in some circumstances
and if not aren't you leaving two big
holes in our defenses as
one of your own mps said the heating's
on but the window is wide open
and professor witty with some of the
measures improving
in your view might there be a case for
opening schools in
england to all pupils again before
the 8th of march which is what wales and
scotland look to be set to be doing
laura a couple of points we have among
the toughest
border regimes now anywhere in the world
and so
the we're restricting as much as we can
any risk of importing new infection into
this
into this country without totally
secluding the uk
economy which relies on 75 percent of
its
uh medicines come from europe 50 45 of
uh
of our food uh comes from uh from
overseas
uh 250 000 businesses uh
rely on on imports so we can't cut
ourselves off
uh completely but what we can do uh is
say it's illegal to go on holiday
uh which it is it's illegal to to go on
holiday it's illegal to
uh come to this country from a great
list of uh of countries
around the world and uh if you do come
here uh then
you will be if you do come here from one
of those countries then you will be
as we've said taken uh and put in uh
special
uh accommodation uh and the
health secretary will be making a
further announcement about that tomorrow
laura but you know even if you're not
coming from there and you're coming into
this country even if you're a uk
uh national returning to this country uh
just think
what you've got to do you've got to take
a test 72 hours before flying
uh you've got to do a passenger locator
form
you can be kicked off a flight if that
doesn't happen uh and so on and then
you've got a quarantine
and you'll have the isolation insurance
service on your case
uh for 10 days so we are we are
operating a
a very tough uh regime already
and uh you know within the limits of
what is uh possible given that we're a
an economy that depends on on trade and
access to the
to the world um and uh
your your second point was about uh test
and trace and isolate and
uh again uh yes we do want to see more
people
uh isolating and uh and and doing the
right thing but overwhelmingly
uh people are and uh and have been uh
don't forget that in addition to the
five hundred pounds it's a ten thousand
pound
uh fine uh if you don't in addition to
all the other support that we
uh that we've offered throughout the
pandemic to help people
throughout the the pandemic and
an nhs test and trace is now reaching i
think has a capacity
of 800 000 a day
it's absolutely colossal and if you
listen to uh the some of the
uh points that uh chris and i were
making earlier on
about what we've discovered about the uh
the
effectiveness of the vaccines the
transmissibility
of the of the virus
with the the vaccines that is because
of uh nhs testing tracing
and the vast capacity of this country
now has
the genomic sequencing so the short
answer is
uh yes i do think people should uh uh
should self-isolate but nhs tests and
trace is reaching
uh 90 of contacts and
and the vast majority of them are doing
the right thing
um and answer the question you asked me
i mean the narrow question about dates
is always going to be a matter for
ministers
uh but let me be a bit more helpful in
that there are very clearly
two sides to this argument and both of
them are true
there's an incredibly strong set of
evidence which i don't think anyone
disputes
that being in school is good for
children it's good for their mental
health it's good for their long-term
health
it obviously helps their parents as well
that's not the primary thing but it's
also a very important part of it
so there are really clear medical and
educational and societal reasons why
being in schools is absolutely the right
place to be
and we are confident and this actually
goes back to the fan chart i showed
that the risk to children relative to
adults is incredibly low
so we consider school is a safe place
for children to be as well as the right
place for children to be
none of that is disputed by anybody on
the other side and this is also not
disputed actually
is that uh we have had we were
managing to hold the line with schools
open before we got the new variant
uh in england uh b1171 with this new
variant which is more transmissible and
i think
the evidence for that is really clear
now we had to unfortunately do some
additional things
which included the closure of schools to
pull down the incredibly high rates
of uh increase we had up to this very
high rate we've now currently got at the
moment now the rates are now coming down
but they're still incredibly high and if
we were to start to take off again from
the very high levels we are at the
moment
the nhs will get back into trouble
extraordinarily fast
so it's essential that people carry on
social distances they are
but some of these additional measures
like schools are also very important
now the point where in a sense those two
balance where we think we'll feel
confident enough
that the line can be held with the
schools open
to make sure that those first set of
things that the benefits to children are
there
is is a difficult judgment and that's
one which fundamentally is one for
ministers
but those two sets of arguments i don't
think are disputed by anybody and it's
really just a matter of
when is exactly the right moment to
balance them thanks very much laura
carlden
itv thank you prime minister given what
we've just heard i think i ought to ask
you the school's question then i mean
the vaccination program is going so well
we've had so much good news today are
you
absolutely committed to not reopening
schools
in england before the 8th of march or do
you think you could pull that forward
if things are really going well and if
for example you managed to
vaccinate those first four groups more
quickly than originally
expected and if i could also ask chris
whitty one on
the the death rates i think you said
that we will
first see the effects of the vaccination
program
in the deaths rates those are already
coming down
is it possible that we are already
seeing the effects of the vaccination
program
in that death rate carl let me give you
the logic of of the march the eighth
uh date for the earliest which we think
it's sensible to
to open schools and obviously i'm very
very hopeful that we will be able
uh to do that uh but let me say let me
say why we think that's the the prudent
uh date to set um we've got to make a
judgment about
the effectiveness of the vaccines in
bringing down the death
death rate and bringing down uh serious
illness and
chris will say a bit more about that at
the moment but that judgment were
we're going to make in the week of the
of the 15th we'll look at all the data
we'll see some promising stuff from uh
from israel uh but at the moment to the
best of my knowledge we're not yet
seeing
the kind of conclusive data that we need
on that on that key point
uh then we want to be waiting to ensure
that
after uh february the 15th we leave uh
three weeks
for all the jcvi cohorts one to four
all those most vulnerable groups that
you saw uh on chris's chart
uh have allowed their vaccination uh
immunity
to be acquired and as you know it takes
uh about three weeks for it uh properly
uh to set in
then uh we need so that that speaks to a
date
uh of uh of about march the uh march the
eighth
then then of course you need to give the
schools uh two weeks notice
uh to uh to open and so for all those
reasons we think that's the
the sensible uh date and i i just would
say to
people who understandably want to go
faster and i you know i
i share that uh that anxiety and that
urgency because as chris has just said
we fought for so hard and for so long to
try to keep
uh schools open i think that was a
reasonable thing to do
but what we don't want to do now carl
that we're now that we're making
progress
uh with the vaccine uh rollout and we've
got a timetable
for the way ahead we don't want to be
forced into
into reverse and and we so we think this
is the the prudent
and cautious approach and we're going to
i think it much better to stick to that
uh and in terms of the other question
you answered uh asked me um
i i although you can if you really do
multiple analyses convince yourself
there's a bit of
a change in the very earliest sides of a
change
in reality what we want to see is a
significant reduction in death rate you
can actually see which actually matters
to people
significant numbers coming down and if
you look at the age ranges
of people who are dying at the moment
there's no strong evidence yet
and nor to be clear would we expect it
yet for reasons i've come on to
that actually for example people in
their 80s are suddenly
reducing in terms of mortality but
people who are younger ages who are
vaccinated later are not things are
coming down but in proportion
that you would expect now we expect we
anticipate that will change that's
but the reason there's a delay if you
think if you just think this through and
this is just building on the point the
prime minister
made is between the time someone is
vaccinated and the time you would expect
to have first
effects in older people might be for the
sake of argument three weeks
it takes a further week for them maybe
to get infected
after that time and first infected and
obviously that risk continues then from
then and on uh for a long period of time
and then to get more civilian and then
in some cases
although a minority of cases to die and
that's quite a long delay
and although we've got due to the
remarkable efforts of all the people the
prime minister's talking about
particularly the nhs in rolling
out this vaccine to very high numbers
now
it is relatively recent and the death
rates we're seeing at the moment
are people who would have been in in
terms of the vaccine
you would you know you wouldn't have
expected to see any effect until going
back about five weeks and the rates of
vaccination were much lower
at that stage but we do i hope that and
anticipate that it's not just a hope
it's an expectation
that as we go through time in the next
two or three weeks
we will start to see reductions in
mortality in the people who've been
vaccinated compared to those who've not
but i think the good news is the
reductions in mortality in absolutely
everybody
and those are happening because of
everybody staying at home uh and
uh avoiding unnecessary social contact
and all the things that we know we
should do the hands-faced space
actions uh absolutely thank you uh
sam coats of sky prime minister with 10
million
people vaccinated is it morally right
that it continues to be
illegal for the over 70s 80s and 90s not
to see relatives who have also been
vaccinated and waited there three weeks
you're saying that there's not enough
data but don't have to balance this with
the fact that for some of these people
time might be short
and you've had pretty strong evidence
already can't we apply some common sense
to people like that
in particular rather than criminalizing
them
and to chris witte there are some people
in government who say that every adult
might have had or at least been offered
a first dose
by may and a second dose by the end of
august
what do you think of that and in that
case what's the rationale for social
distancing measures in the winter
life not back to normal which some of
your colleagues
have suggested might be the case well
sam i
totally understand people's feelings of
frustration and
how strongly people want to be able to
see their elderly relatives i i just
give a very
simple answer uh obviously those steps
have been taken
uh with care homes to make them as kobe
secure as possible to allow people
uh to be visited under very uh
controlled uh circumstances but we
you've seen the numbers in in care homes
lately although they're not as bad as
they were perhaps in the proportion of
the
deaths as they were in the in the first
peak they remain
uh very very sad and we are seeing far
too many deaths of elderly people
and so we've just got to remain very
cautious for the time being but as you
can see we are we're making huge
progress
through those groups and we'll and we'll
go on uh in the in the in the
in the weeks ahead and the the time uh
to uh get everybody done uh as you know
is can be now measured in weeks and
months so
uh uh we will get it done as fast as we
conceivably can
and ask the question you ask ask me i
mean optimism is a
great thing uh but logistics aren't
about optimism they're simply about what
numbers you can get through
in the right kind of order and i think
the number that may and august strike me
as
at the very optimistic end i think if
you talk to people who are doing this
extraordinarily fast
rollout and if you look at this globally
this is an extraordinarily fast
rollout they would say they will go
absolutely hell for leather as people
are doing an incredible job
but those numbers trying to hit those
dates that is probably beyond what is
possible
given the constraints of supply and all
the other things that we have to deal
with remember
also it's very important we've got to
re-vaccinate
all the people in the first tiers
as they go through so at a certain point
and that point
we had this process of delaying the
first sort of the second dose
largely to increase the number of people
we could get through very quickly to
begin with provide that initial
the predominant uh protection the
beginning
but we do have to vaccinate all of them
within 12 weeks and that means that from
march we'll be starting to revaccinate
as well as the first vaccines and that
will by
never inevitably slow things down and on
winter
um the reason my colleagues uh have uh
implied
that a highly contagious uh respiratory
virus
which is not going to be eradicated from
the globe or indeed eliminated from the
uk
may surge in winter is because that's
what highly contagious respiratory
viruses
always do i think everybody knows that
so it is no surprise to anybody i think
and should not be
that even if we have a highly successful
vaccine rollout which we clearly are
having
and the vaccines work very well which we
very much hope will have the solid data
on very soon
there will still be residual risk if you
think of flu
which actually is probably less
contagious that's why we managed to get
rid of flu completely this year
uh but with the non the npi measures uh
then
kovid you still have flu surges despite
lots of people being vaccinated and many
many people having had it previously
so you've just got to expect that in the
winter there will be surges of
respiratory virus
and i think to expect that somehow
magically this will not apply to kovid
seems surprising and i don't think that
will come as any surprise to anyone in
the general public
thanks very much jason groves dailymail
thanks prime minister we've heard a lot
about the impact on mental health and
there's reports that you're looking at
maybe easing the rules about an outdoor
exercise can you tell us anything about
that and also
uh the mail is campaigning for a statue
for captain tom is that
something you could back um to professor
witte are we
past the peak now it looks like we are
from that graph and
lots of people will have seen the video
of you being harangued in the street the
other day how did you feel about that do
you feel
in danger
well uh jason on the on the issue of a
uh a a statue for for captain donald
a public memorial of some kind of
captain tom uh i'm absolutely
uh of course hoping to know that
everybody uh
that's the kind of thing that people
would want to support and uh will be
uh working with his family to uh to to
see what
they feel is most appropriate and uh and
be taking that forward so i think your
your campaign is an excellent one uh yes
i mean i think that most of my
colleagues think we are past the peak
um now that doesn't mean you could never
have another pete but at this point in
time provided people continue to follow
the guidelines
we're on the downward slope of cases of
hospitalizations and of deaths
uh in all four of the nations of the
united kingdom so i think
we do think at this point this peak at
least we are past
in terms of being around i mean uh you
know
the odd young lad showing off
occasionally
happens i didn't think anything of it
frankly i was very surprised it was
picked up by the media at all as
anything of any importance
i'm sure he'll become a model citizen in
due course and hopefully more like
captain tom who's the kind of person who
i think much more exemplifies
uh the the spirit of the uk i mean he
was himself
clearly absolutely remarkable but what
he was also doing was showing
how it is that everybody has responded
to this and this has been a nationwide
everybody responding so it wasn't for
that we would not see those numbers
coming down
and that peak you've just talked about
would not have occurred that is because
everybody has worked together forgive me
jason i think you asked me something
else
remind me what it was well actually
quickly there's been reports you're very
concerned about
outdoor exercises yeah absolutely
exercise yeah yes
my is is schools uh jason
uh but obviously we keep everything uh
under review the the most important
thing is to is to continue to make
progress as we are in
in driving the infection rate down and
that's what that's what we're doing
uh let's go to uh uh francis elliott of
the times
from france you need to unmute prime
minister when might we expect
a date uh for the second wave um
of vaccinations at the moment we only
told spring uh
obviously february the 15th manages to
energize the whole process
um and you seem to have changed your
approach pre in the exiting of the
lockdown previously
it was open where we can uh now it's
stay closed until we can all open
um is that fair and why have you changed
your approach is it because you're
you're worried about mixed messaging
from the from the previous regional
tears approach
and professor witty if i could ask you
it was dino harding said today that
20 000 people are not um complying with
the
instruction to isolate what what do you
think should be done to improve
that compliance rate
frances we we're going to continue to
keep an open mind
about the uh regional uh or the national
approach but but in the moment quite
frankly when you look at the graphs
uh it's pretty uniform acro and there
are some variations and some things are
going slightly different directions in
some parts of the country
but it's pretty uh uniform at the moment
and therefore it feels to us at the
moment uh
as though um uh we'll be
we'll be going down in tears uh
nationally
and i think that that but that obviously
could uh could change you'll be you'll
be hearing more
on uh on february the the 15th or the
week of february 15th and on as i say on
february the
22nd uh we will be setting out in as
much detail
as we as we can about uh
where we see the dates what the
timetable
could be the earlier states by which we
want to do what you remember
what we did last year uh setting out a
route map
uh we'll we'll do that again though this
time uh
the the terminus will be clearly that
we'll we'll have got everybody
uh vaccinated and we i hope uh and uh
we'll be in a
a very different situation uh from that
which uh
we were all in last summer when we got
the the disease down
uh which was a fantastic effort to a
much much lower
level but we we always knew and we
always knew that it had the capacity
to surge back uh in in the autumn
and over the over the over the winter
months as indeed
it has this time as we go into the
second half of the year
we're going to have the confidence of
knowing that a huge proportion of the
british public
particularly the most vulnerable uh will
have
been vaccinated and and probably
received a very high degree
of immunity so that will very much
change our approach to the
to the autumn and the winter as as chris
says
a highly infectious respiratory diseases
don't uh go away
all together and not not easily and
on the question you asked i mean the big
risk to the public is the total number
of people
and the absolute number will reduce the
biggest thing we can do is actually
reduce the total number of people who've
got covered now because that will reduce
the number of contacts so
actually getting the rates down is the
single most important thing we can do
but
of those who are phoned up because
they're a contact
first thing is we should be very
grateful to the people who first
actually notified because that's a
huge public service to everyone else and
then in terms of their contacts actually
very high proportions of people do
self-isolate but the reason people don't
there are broadly two
there's not realizing how important it
is so they need the positive incentive
to do it and that's very important for
people to realize
by doing this you are making sure you're
not
the bit of a chain that leads to a
vulnerable person at the end so it's a
way of protecting vulnerable people
is by self-isolating people
understanding that is absolutely
critical to this
and then of course it's about trying to
reduce disincentives
and those have been debated at some
length
but those are the two things you which
basically mean whether someone is or is
not going to self-isolate
just on the um on the question on the
timetable for the second wave yes
when can we expect a bit of clarity
around beyond spring which is a bit
vague
on the second wave of vaccinations i
think what you
you can expect is that on the on the
15th we'll say a bit more
uh or about uh where we've got to and
obviously we're hopeful that we'll have
done jcvi uh wonderful and in that week
i expect we'll be saying uh a bit more
about the the timetable for doing
uh jcvi uh one to nine and uh and the
priorities thereafter so
that will be in terms of the the
timetable for where the vaccinations are
going that's that's
what you should uh more or less expect
but on the on the 22nd i hope
uh to be setting out in in some more
detail uh is some some dates and and
some possibilities for
uh for the whole of the of the year
ahead okay thanks a lot uh
let's go to david hughes of pa
prime minister it's obviously good news
that 10 million people have received
their first jobs
do you have any information yet on how
many people are refusing
to uh take the vaccine and if so what
impact is that going to have on your
timetable for easing the lockdown
um professor witty returning to the
footage that jason raised with you
um how alarming is it that this deep
into the pandemic
there are still people who don't seem to
understand the gravity of the situation
and how frustrating is that for you and
your fellow medical professionals
david i've been amazed and and so
encouraged by the the way
uh communities are coming together to
get the uh the
vaccine to take it people are taking it
up across the whole of the country i was
uh yes it we we have been worried about
vaccine hesitancy in
uh in in some parts of the country in in
some communities
uh that's unquestionably an issue and
where we're doing everything we can to
uh to encourage people to come forward
uh to give them all the confidence they
need and they must have come they should
have confidence it's a
it's a great thing to get a vaccine but
i was i was i i think on monday i was up
at the
the al uh center in in batley
uh talking to uh community leaders there
who've done an amazing job and got
uh i think the the vaccination rate for
the over
80s in that part of in yorkshire it's
now 97
including uh all communities so it's you
know it's a a real
achievement and i would urge everybody
to
follow the example of of yorkshire if
you're not already there
i mean the data and this links both to
what the prime minister just said in the
question you asked me the data is that
vactine vaccine acceptance understanding
by the general population of the
importance of vaccine
is incredibly high in the uk compared to
almost any other comparative country
and i think people do understand the
importance they understand how to
balance the huge
benefits uh against any uh things
they're concerned about
am i alarmed about that one's going to
be a noisy uh group of people who
disagree with virtually anything but
actually there is no clear evidence
there's a large background swell of
opinion
the great majority of people uh fully
understand the issues
they've stuck extraordinarily well over
an incredibly long period of time
to the very difficult lockdown and other
measures and they've done that because
they understand that this is the way
that you protect the vulnerable in
society
and that is the overwhelming majority of
the population and i think i think it's
very easy to lose that
uh sense perspective it is the
overwhelming majority of people
who have done so understand it and if
you don't
uh think that this is a big issue go and
talk to a doctor or a nurse who works in
a hospital
and they'll put you right very fast
thanks david thanks very much everybody
see you next time
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news